Add machine learning exercise notebook - participant version (#104)
AlexsLemonade/training-modules: machine-learning/05-machine_learning_exercise.Rmd

---
title: "Exercise: Exploring drug exposure in the NCI-60 cell lines"
output: 
  html_notebook: 
    toc: true
    toc_float: true
---

## NCI-60 Cell Line Data

In this exercise, we'll work with datafrom GEO accession [`GSE116436`](https://www.refine.bio/experiments/GSE116436/drug-induced-change-in-gene-expression-across-nci-60-cell-lines-after-exposure-to-15-anticancer-agents-for-2-6-and-24h)
that was processed with refine.bio. 

Here's an excerpt of the description from the authors:

> To identify patterns of drug-induced gene modulation that occur across different cell types, we measured gene expression changes across NCI-60 cell lines after exposure to 15 anticancer agents.

**We've supplied the following to you:**

> 

Reviewer: Do you want to specify which of these come directly from refine.bio?

Author: This is going to get restructured based on a conversation I had with Deepa, which I think will provide clarity.

* The gene expression matrix (`data/GSE116436/GSE116436_filtered.tsv`)
* The sample metadata (`data/GSE116436/metadata_GSE116436_cleaned.tsv`)
* Sample-sample Pearson correlation matrix (`data/GSE116436/GSE116436_sample_correlation.RDS`)
* PCA (`prcomp` output) (`models/NCI60_prcomp_results.RDS`)
* A PLIER model (`models/NCI60_PLIER_model.RDS`)

> _Note that we've only made a subset of samples available and we've already

Reviewer: ```suggestion
_Note that we've only processed a subset of the samples and we've already
```

Author: This sentence is going to get taken out.

cleaned the metadata for you.

> If you want to learn more about how the metadata was cleaned, ask an

Author: I am hoping these won't _mainly_ be used after the workshop.

> If you want to learn more about how the metadata was cleaned, ask an

Author: But I am restructuring this intro per @dvenprasad and with that restructuring I will probably remove it.

instructor._

We're going to look specifically at **pathways that change with treatment**, 

> but we precomputed the other objects in case you would like to understand what 

Author: Double checked and found [this source](http://nomistakespublishing.com/wp-content/uploads/2017/10/List-of-22Pre22-Words.pdf), which states:
> The consensus is, however, to only use a hyphen when aprefix ends with the same vowel as the word it's attaching to. 

And lists `precompute` as the spelling.

samples tend to group together or what is driving the variation in the data.

We'll use `dplyr` and `ggplot2` quite a bit in this notebook, so use the chunk
below to load them.

```{r}

```

> The metadata is available at `data/data/GSE116436/metadata_GSE116436_cleaned.tsv`.

Reviewer 2: Is there a data folder inside the data folder? If so, line 21 should be changed.

> Read it in with `readr` and save it as `metadata_df`

Reviewer 2: Needs a period.

```{r}
metadata_df <- 
```

What metadata do we have for these samples ? 
Use this chunk to explore `metadata_df`.

```{r}

```

## What pathways are perturbed by the drugs in this experiment?

> The PLIER model we've precomputed is available `models/NCI60_PLIER_model.RDS`.

Reviewer: Just checking: this model is trained on the subset of samples that we've provided them & they could get the same thing by running that? If so, no changes. If yes, we might want to explain the samples this was trained on.

Author: Yes if they followed the same general steps as we present this module, they would get the same model.

Read it in with `readr` and save it as `plier_results`.

```{r}
plier_results <-
```

> 

Reviewer 2: I think the phrase “of what is” could be removed from this sentence and it would flow more? Unless I’m misunderstanding it.

Author: Will go with "the object returned" instead.

The `summary` element of what is returned by PLIER can tell us about
associations, you can access it with `$` and it is a `data.frame`.

Use this chunk to view the PLIER model `summary`.

```{r}

```

> Save the summary information as it's own data.frame called `summary_df`. 

Reviewer 2: `it’s` <- `its` since its possessive here.

We'll use this object to find out more about our model. 

```{r}
summary_df <-
```

The latent variables from this model will be associated with a pathway if the

> gene expression data supports that there is some variation in the expression

Reviewer: ```suggestion
gene expression data supports that there is some shared variation in the expression
```

levels of genes in that pathway.
It could be due to treatment with a drug or variation could arise from tissue- 
or cell line-specific differences.

### Is there a latent variable associated with the proteasome pathway?

We can use a chain of `dplyr` functions to filter `summary_df`.
Let's call `FDR < 0.05` associated; this is the same cutoff we used in the
PLIER notebook earlier.

```{r}
summary_df %>%
  dplyr::filter(,  # significant associations only
                # grepl returns TRUE when the pattern "proteasome" is found
                # in the pathway column

>                 grepl("proteasome", pathway, ignore.case = TRUE))

Reviewer 2: Might consider using `dplyr::contains()` for this since I don’t think we’ve introduced them to grep functions at all. This way we can stick to the tidyverse theme.

Author: Good call. I'm dropping `dplyr::` as well here.

Author: Dug into this a bit more -- I believe the preferred way to "keep it in the tidyverse" here is to use `stringr::str_detect` (see: [this SO post](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/22850026/filtering-row-which-contains-a-certain-string-using-dplyr)). But to ignore case we'd have to do `stringr::fixed("proteasome", ignore.case = TRUE))` within `str_select` and I think that becomes more confusing if you see it for the first time.

Reviewer 2: Hmmm... that makes it harder to say. Your call.

Author: I'm going to stick with `grepl`.

```

The LV index column of `summary_df` tells us _which row_ in the LV by sample
matrix `plier_results$B` we should look at.
To make plotting easier downstream, let's make a data.frame that contains two 
columns, `geo_accession` and `proteasome_lv` that contain the sample identifiers
and the values for the latent variable associated with the proteasome gene set, 
respectively.
Recall that the column names of `plier_results$B` are the sample identifiers.
(Hint: `?colnames`)

Call this data.frame `proteasome_df`.

```{r}
proteasome_df <- data.frame(geo_accession = ,
                            proteasome_lv = )
```

Now that you have `proteasome_df`, let's join it with our metadata using
an `inner_join` from `dplyr` to form a new data.frame called `prot_meta_df`.
We'll join by the sample names, which is what `by = "geo_accession"` specifies.

```{r}

> prot_meta_df <- dplyr::inner_join(x = , 

Reviewer 2: Could use <THESE> here. And other places.

Author: I don't follow

Reviewer 2: Forgot that `<>` gets made invisible.

```{r}
prot_meta_df %>%
```

What do you notice about the samples with the highest values?
Look up the mechanism of action for the drugs in `treatment`.
Do these results make sense?

### Line graph

Let's make a plot that shows the change of the proteasome latent variable
expression level over time, when treated with the drug that comes to the top
of the list.
We'll look at a single tissue of your choosing.
This requires use to do the following:

1. Filter `prot_meta_df` to samples from your tissue of interest and the
   drug that we are interested in
2. Make a line graph that tracks the expression value of the proteasome 
   latent variable during different time points of the experiment.

Save this plot as `p`.

```{r}
p <- prot_meta_df %>%
  # use these lines to filter to only the samples that are treated with the drug
  # of interest and to the tissue of your choice
  %>% 
  ggplot(aes(x = ,  # what needs to be on the x-axis?
             y = ,  # what needs to be on the y-axis?
             color = cell_line,  # color by individual cell line
             # we need to use group to make our line plot
             group = cell_line)) +

>   # use facets to separate dosages

Reviewer 2: We’ve had them use `facet_wrap` in the scRNAseq exercise. So hopefully if they reached that part of the exercise they remember how to do it.

  facet_wrap(~ dose_nM) +
  # these two geoms make a line graph connecting individual points
  geom_point() +
  geom_line() +
  # use this scale for accessibility
  colorblindr::scale_color_OkabeIto()
```

Let's see what the plot looks like with this chunk below.

```{r}
p
```

**Based on what you know about the mechanism of action of this drug, do these 
results look how you expect?
What did the PLIER model uncover and what does the plot mean?**

#### Customizing the plot

We can add to `p` or tweak things by using the `+` operator without having to
repeat the code that set it up.

> In the chunk below, we're changing the theme of the plot to `theme_bw()`.

Reviewer 2: Nice add.

```{r}
p + theme_bw()
```

Using the new theme, label the x-axis Time (Hours) and the y-axis Proteasome 
LV Expression Level.
Make the title the name of the drug you are plotting data for.

```{r}

```

If we wanted to change the spacing of the x-axis, such that the time points are
evenly spaced, we'd have to make `time_hours` into a factor.

> _This is not always an appropriate visualization choice, it depends on your

Reviewer: Would add a second sentence here noting when it is/isn't an appropriate choice. Presumably when the interval is important, don't make them evenly spaced.

experiment!_

Let's check what class `time_hours` currently is with the function `class`.

```{r}
class(prot_meta_df$time_hours)
```

Use `mutate()` and `as.factor()` to make the `time_hours` column into a
factor. 

```{r}

```

Now make a new plot, `p_factor`, using the same theme, color scale, labels, etc.

```{r}

```

Display `p_factor`

```{r}

```

Did it display in the order that you wanted?
If not, you can use the `levels` argument of the `factor()` function
to specify the order.
See [this post](https://rstudio-pubs-static.s3.amazonaws.com/7433_4537ea5073dc4162950abb715f513469.html).

> ## Additional analyses

Reviewer 2: Noice. An “Advanced Topic”.
